Extract ActionCollection out of ResourceReporter, overhaul DataCollector (#8063)
chef/chef: docs/dev/action_collection.md

---
title: Action Collection
---

> 

Reviewer: a small bulleted list of what the action collection hopes to achieve would be super useful. You get it once you read the whole thing and think it through + have the historical context of problems that zap had, but it would be put into just a few bullets that would make this whole thing much more useful

# Action Collection Design

> The action collection tracks all actions taken by all Chef resources.  The resources can be in recipe code, as sub-resources of custom resources or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Action Collection tracks all actions taken by all Chef resources.  The resources can be in recipe code, as sub-resources of custom resources or
```

> they may be built "by hand".  Since the action collection hooks the events which are fired from the `run_action` method on Chef::Resource it does

Reviewer: ```suggestion
they may be built "by hand".  Since Action Collection hooks the events which are fired from the `run_action` method on Chef::Resource it does
```

not matter how the resources were built (as long as they were correctly passed the Chef `run_context`).

> This is complementary to the resource collection itself which as incomplete statement of what might happen or has happened in the run since there are

Reviewer: which as incomplete?

> This is complementary to the resource collection itself which as incomplete statement of what might happen or has happened in the run since there are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is complementary to the resource collection itself which has an incomplete picture of what might happen or has happened in the run since there are
```

> many common ways of invoking resource actions which are not captured by how the resource collection is built.  Replying the sequence of actions in

Reviewer: Replaying or replying?

> many common ways of invoking resource actions which are not captured by how the resource collection is built.  Replying the sequence of actions in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
many common ways of invoking resource actions which are not captured by how the resource collection is built.  Replaying the sequence of actions in
```

> the action collection would be closer to replaying the chef-client converge than trying to re-converge the resource collection (although both of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Action Collection would be closer to replaying the chef-client converge than trying to re-converge the resource collection (although both of
```

those models are still flawed in the presence of any imperative code that controls the shape of those objects).

> This extracts common duplicated code from the Data Collection and old Resource Reporter, and is designed to be used by other consumers which

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This design extracts common duplicated code from the Data Collection and old Resource Reporter, and is designed to be used by other consumers which
```

need to ask questions like "in this run, what file resources had actions fired on them?", which can then be used to answer questions like
"which files is Chef managing in this directory?".

# Usage

## Action Collection Event Hook Registration

Consumers may register an event handler which hooks the `action_collection_registration` hook.  This event is fired directly before recipes are
compiled and converged (after library loading, attributes, etc).  This is just before the earliest point in time that a resource should fire an
action so represents the latest point that a consumer should make a decision about if it needs the action collection to be enabled or not.

> Consumers should hook this method, where they will be passed the action collection instance, which can be saved to reuse, and then should

Reviewer: this sentence is quite confusing

with the Action Collection, which would disable the Action Collection.  This makes use of the delayed hooking through the `action_collection_regsitration`
so that the Data Collector never registers itself after it is disabled.

## Searching

There is a function `filtered_collection` which returns "slices" off of the `ActionCollection` object.  The `max_nesting` argument can be used to prune
how deep into sub-resources the returned view goes (`max_nesting: 0` will return only resources in recipe context, with any hand created resources, but
no subresources).  There are also 5 different states of the action:  `up_to_date`, `skipped`, `updated`, `failed`, `unprocessed` which can be filtered
on.  All of these are true by default, so they must be disabled to remove them from the filtered collection.

The `ActionCollection` object itself implements enumerable and returns `ActionRecord` objects (see the `ActionCollection` code for the fields exposed on
`ActionRecords`).

This would return all file resources in any state in the recipe context:

```
Chef.run_context.action_collection.filtered_collection(max_nesting: 0).select { |rec| rec.new_resource.is_a?(Chef::Resource::File) }
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NOTE:
```
